He woke up late the next day, after an uneasy sleep, but the sleep had not refreshed him.
He woke up bilious, irritable, angry, and looked with hatred at his little closet of a room.
It was a tiny little cell, about six paces long, with the most pitiful appearance, with its yellowish, dusty wallpaper peeling away from the walls everywhere, and so low that a slightly tall man felt uneasy in it, and it always seemed that in a moment you would bump your head against the ceiling.
The furniture matched the room: there were three old chairs, not quite serviceable, a painted table in the corner, on which lay several notebooks and books; from the mere fact that they were covered with dust one could see that no one's hand had touched them for a long time; and, finally, a clumsy big sofa that took up almost the whole wall and half the width of the entire room, once upholstered in chintz but now in rags, which served as Raskolnikov's bed.
He often slept on it just as he was, without undressing, without a sheet, covering himself with his old, threadbare student coat and with one small pillow at his head, under which he put all the linen he had, clean and worn, to make the pillow higher.
In front of the sofa stood a small table.
It would have been hard to sink lower or become more slovenly; but in his present state of mind Raskolnikov even found it pleasant.
He had resolutely withdrawn from everyone, like a turtle into its shell, and even the face of the servant girl who was obliged to wait on him and who sometimes peeped into his room aroused bile and convulsions in him.
That is how it is with some monomaniacs who have concentrated too much on something.
His landlady had stopped serving him meals two weeks ago, and he had not yet thought of going to explain himself to her, although he was sitting there without dinner.
Nastasya, the cook and the landlady's only servant, was partly glad of such a mood in the lodger and had stopped cleaning and sweeping in his room altogether, so that only once a week, by chance, she would sometimes pick up the broom.
It was she who woke him now.
"Get up, what are you sleeping for!" she shouted over him. "It's going on ten."
I've brought you some tea; do you want some tea?
I suppose you've grown thin?
The lodger opened his eyes, shuddered, and recognized Nastasya.
"Is the tea from the landlady, then?" he asked, slowly and with a sickly look raising himself on the sofa.
"What, from the landlady!"
She set before him her own cracked teapot with tea that had already been used, and put down two yellow lumps of sugar.
"Here, Nastasya, please take this," he said, fumbling in his pocket (he had slept dressed) and pulled out a handful of copper coins, "go and buy me a roll."
And in the sausage shop take a little sausage, the cheaper kind.
"I'll bring you the roll this minute, but wouldn't you rather have cabbage soup instead of sausage?"
Good cabbage soup, yesterday's.
I set it aside for you yesterday, but you came home late.
Good cabbage soup.
When the cabbage soup was brought and he began to eat it, Nastasya sat down beside him on the sofa and began to chatter.
She was a peasant woman from the country and a very talkative one.
"Praskovya Pavlovna wants to complain about you to the police," she said.
He winced hard.
"To the police?"
What does she want?
"You don't pay your money and you don't move out of the flat."
It's clear what she wants.
"Ugh, that's all I needed," he muttered, grinding his teeth. "No, that's... inconvenient for me now..."
"She's a fool," he added aloud.
"I'll drop in on her today and have a talk."
"She may be a fool, just like me, but what about you, wise man, lying there like a sack, nothing to be seen of you?"
You used to go and teach children, you say, but why don't you do anything now?
"I am doing something..." Raskolnikov said reluctantly and sternly.
"What are you doing?"
"Work..."
"What kind of work?"
"I'm thinking," he answered seriously after a pause.
Nastasya simply rolled with laughter.
She was one of those who laugh easily, and when something made her laugh she laughed soundlessly, swaying and shaking all over, until she herself began to feel sick.
"Have you thought up a lot of money, then?" she managed to utter at last.
"You can't teach children without boots."
And anyway, to hell with it.
"Well, don't spit in the well."
"They pay copper for teaching children."
"What can you do with kopecks?" he continued reluctantly, as if answering his own thoughts.
"And you'd like the whole capital at once?"
He looked at her strangely.
"Yes, the whole capital," he answered firmly after a pause.
"Well, take it easy, or you'll scare me; it's really too frightening."
So, shall I go for the roll or not?
"As you like."
"Oh, I forgot!"
A letter came for you yesterday while you were out.
"A letter! For me! From whom?"
"From whom, I don't know."
I gave the postman three kopecks of my own.
Will you give it back or not?
"Then bring it, for God's sake, bring it!" Raskolnikov shouted, all agitated. "Lord!"
A minute later the letter appeared.
Just as he thought: from his mother, from R- province.
He even turned pale as he took it.
He had not received letters for a long time; but now something else suddenly gripped his heart too.
"Nastasya, go away, for God's sake; here are your three kopecks, only, for God's sake, go away quickly!"
The letter trembled in his hands; he did not want to open it in front of her: he wanted to be alone with this letter.
When Nastasya had gone out, he quickly put it to his lips and kissed it; then for a long time he peered at the handwriting of the address, at the small, slanting handwriting of his mother, so familiar and dear to him, she who had once taught him to read and write.
He hesitated; he even seemed to be afraid of something.
At last he opened it: the letter was large, thick, weighing two lots; two large sheets of post paper were covered with the tiniest writing.
"My dear Rodya," wrote the mother, "it is already more than two months since I have talked with you in writing, which has made me suffer and even kept me awake some nights, thinking.
But surely you will not blame me for this involuntary silence of mine.
You know how I love you; you are the only one we have, Dunya and I, you are our all, our whole hope, our trust.
What I felt when I learned that you had already left the university several months ago for lack of means to support yourself, and that your lessons and other sources of income had come to an end!
How could I help you with my hundred and twenty rubles a year of pension?
The fifteen rubles I sent you four months ago I borrowed, as you yourself know, against that same pension, from our local merchant Afanasy Ivanovich Vakhrushin.
He is a kind man and was also a friend of your father's.
But having given him the right to collect the pension for me, I had to wait until the debt was paid off, and this has only just now happened, so that I could not send you anything all this time.
But now, thank God, I think I can send you some more, and in general we can now even boast of our fortune, which I hasten to tell you about.
And, first of all, can you guess, dear Rodya, that your sister has been living with me for the past month and a half, and we shall never be parted again.
Thank God, her torments are over, but I shall tell you everything in order, so that you may learn how it all happened and what we have been hiding from you until now.
When you wrote to me two months ago that you had heard from someone that Dunya was suffering much from the rudeness in the house of the Svidrigailovs, and asked me for an exact explanation, what could I write you in reply then?
If I had written you the whole truth, you might perhaps have thrown everything up and come to us even on foot, for I know your character and your feelings, and you would not have let your sister be wronged.
And I myself was in despair, but what was to be done?
I myself did not know the whole truth then either.
The main difficulty was that Dunya, having entered their house last year as a governess, had taken a whole hundred rubles in advance on condition that it be deducted monthly from her salary, and therefore she could not leave the position without paying off the debt.
And she took this sum (now I can explain everything to you, my priceless Rodya) chiefly in order to send you sixty rubles, which you so needed then and which you did receive from us last year.
We deceived you then, writing that it came from Dunya's previous savings, but that was not so, and now I am telling you the whole truth, because everything has now suddenly changed for the better by the will of God, and so that you may know how Dunya loves you and what a priceless heart she has.
Indeed, Mr. Svidrigailov at first treated her very rudely and showed her various incivilities and mockeries at table...
But I do not want to go into all these painful details, so as not to upset you needlessly when everything is now over.
In short, despite the kind and noble treatment of Marfa Petrovna, Mr. Svidrigailov's wife, and of all the household, Dunya found it very hard, especially when Mr. Svidrigailov was, by his old regimental habit, under the influence of Bacchus.
But what turned out afterwards?
Imagine that this madcap had long conceived a passion for Dunya, but concealed it all under the guise of rudeness and contempt for her.
Perhaps he himself was ashamed and horrified, seeing himself already advanced in years and a father of a family, with such frivolous hopes, and therefore he involuntarily vented his anger on Dunya.
Or perhaps it was also that by the rudeness of his treatment and his mockery he wanted only to conceal the whole truth from others.
But at last he could not restrain himself and dared to make Dunya an open and vile proposal, promising her various rewards and, besides that, to abandon everything and go away with her to another village or, perhaps, abroad.
You can imagine all her sufferings!
To leave the position at once was impossible, not only because of the money debt, but also out of consideration for Marfa Petrovna, who might suddenly become suspicious, and consequently discord would have been sown in the family.
And for Dunya it would have been a great scandal too; it could not have passed off otherwise.
There were many various reasons here too, so that Dunya could not possibly hope to escape from that terrible house before six weeks.
Of course you know Dunya, you know how clever she is and what a firm character she has.
Dunya can endure much and even in the most extreme cases find in herself enough magnanimity not to lose her firmness.
She did not even write to me about all this, so as not to upset me, though we often exchanged news.
But the outcome came unexpectedly.
Marfa Petrovna accidentally overheard her husband imploring Dunya in the garden, and, understanding it all wrongly, blamed her for everything, thinking that she was the cause of it all.
A terrible scene took place there in the garden: Marfa Petrovna even struck Dunya, would listen to nothing, and shouted for a whole hour, and at last ordered Dunya to be taken at once to me in town on a simple peasant cart, into which all her things, linen, dresses, everything just as it happened, were thrown untied and unpacked.
And then a pouring rain came up, and Dunya, insulted and disgraced, had to ride with a peasant a whole seventeen versts in an uncovered cart.
Think now what I could have written to you in a letter, in reply to yours which I received two months ago, and what was there to write about?
I myself was in despair; I did not dare write you the truth, because you would have been very unhappy, grieved and indignant, and what could you have done?
You might even have ruined yourself, and Dunya forbade it too; and I could not fill a letter with trifles and write about something while there was such grief in my soul.
For a whole month gossip about this affair went all over our town, and it reached the point that Dunya and I could not even go to church because of the contemptuous looks and whispers, and there were even conversations aloud in our presence.
All our acquaintances turned away from us, everyone even stopped bowing to us, and I learned for certain that the merchant clerks and some clerks from the offices wanted to inflict a base insult on us by smearing the gate of our house with tar, so that the landlords began to demand that we move out of the flat.
The cause of all this was Marfa Petrovna, who had managed to accuse and besmirch Dunya in every house.
She knows everyone here and during that month came to town every minute, and since she is a little talkative and likes to tell about her family affairs and, especially, to complain about her husband to one and all, which is very bad, she spread the whole story in a short time, not only in the town but all over the district.
I fell ill, but Dunya was firmer than I, and if you could have seen how she endured it all and even comforted and encouraged me!
She is an angel!
But, by the mercy of God, our torments were shortened: Mr. Svidrigailov came to his senses and repented, and, probably pitying Dunya, presented Marfa Petrovna with complete and obvious proofs of Dunya's innocence, namely: a letter which Dunya, even before the time when Marfa Petrovna caught them in the garden, had been forced to write and give to him in order to avoid the personal explanations and secret meetings he insisted on, and which, after Dunya's departure, remained in Mr. Svidrigailov's hands.
In this letter she reproached him in the most ardent manner and with complete indignation precisely for the ignobility of his conduct toward Marfa Petrovna, pointed out to him that he was a father and a family man, and that, finally, how vile it was on his part to torment and make unhappy a girl who was already unhappy and defenseless.
In a word, dear Rodya, this letter is written so nobly and touchingly that I sobbed as I read it, and even now I cannot read it without tears.
Besides, in justification of Dunya, there finally appeared the testimony of the servants, who had seen and knew far more than Mr. Svidrigailov himself supposed, as always happens.
Marfa Petrovna was utterly struck and "slain anew," as she herself admitted to us, but she became fully convinced of Dunya's innocence, and the very next day, Sunday, arriving straight at the cathedral, on her knees and in tears she prayed to the Mother of God to give her strength to bear this new trial and to do her duty.
Then, straight from the cathedral, without calling on anyone, she came to us, told us everything, wept bitterly, and, in complete repentance, embraced Dunya and begged her to forgive her.
That same morning, without any delay, straight from us, she set out to all the houses in town and everywhere, in the most flattering expressions for Dunya, shedding tears, restored her innocence and the nobility of her feelings and conduct.
Moreover, she showed everyone and read aloud Dunya's own letter to Mr. Svidrigailov and even allowed copies to be made of it (which, it seems to me, was already superfluous).
Thus she had to visit everyone in town for several days in a row, since some began to take offense that preference had been shown to others, and so turns were established, so that in every house they already waited in advance and everyone knew that on such-and-such a day Marfa Petrovna would be reading this letter at such-and-such a place, and at each reading there again gathered even those who had already heard the letter several times both in their own homes and at other acquaintances', in turn.
My opinion is that much, very much, here was superfluous; but Marfa Petrovna is of such a character.
At least she fully restored Dunya's honor, and all the vileness of this affair fell with indelible shame on her husband, as the chief culprit, so that I even feel sorry for him; they treated this madcap too harshly.
Dunya was at once invited to give lessons in some houses, but she refused.
In general, everyone suddenly began to treat her with particular respect.
All this contributed mainly to that unexpected event through which, one may say, our whole fate is now changing.
Know, dear Rodya, that a suitor has proposed to Dunya and that she has already managed to give her consent, of which I hasten to inform you as soon as possible.
And although this matter was settled without your advice, you will probably not be offended either with me or with your sister, since you will see for yourself, from the matter itself, that it would have been impossible for us to wait and postpone until we received your answer.
And you yourself could not have judged everything exactly at a distance.
It happened like this.
He is already a court councilor, Pyotr Petrovich Luzhin, and a distant relative of Marfa Petrovna, who contributed much to this.
He began by expressing through her a wish to make our acquaintance, was properly received, drank coffee, and the very next day sent a letter in which he very politely explained his proposal and asked for a quick and decisive answer.
He is a busy man of business, and is now hurrying to Petersburg, so that he values every minute.
Of course, at first we were very struck, since it all happened too quickly and unexpectedly.
We thought it over and deliberated together the whole of that day.
He is a reliable and well-off man, serves in two places and already has capital of his own.
True, he is already forty-five years old, but he has a rather pleasant appearance and can still be pleasing to women, and in general he is a very solid and decent man, only a little sullen and seemingly haughty.
But that may only seem so at first glance.
And I warn you, dear Rodya, when you meet him in Petersburg, which will happen very soon, do not judge too quickly and impetuously, as is characteristic of you, if at first glance something in him does not seem right to you.
I say this just in case, though I am sure he will make a pleasant impression on you.
And besides, in order to get to know any person, one must approach him gradually and cautiously, so as not to fall into an error and prejudice which are very hard to correct and make up for afterwards.
And Pyotr Petrovich, at least by many signs, is a very worthy man.
On his very first visit he announced to us that he is a positive man, but in many respects shares, as he himself expressed it, "the convictions of our newest generations" and is an enemy of all prejudices.
He said much else too, because he is somewhat vain and very much likes to be listened to, but that is hardly a vice.
I, of course, understood little, but Dunya explained to me that he is a man of, though not much education, yet intelligent and, it seems, kind.
You know your sister's character, Rodya.
She is a firm, sensible, patient and magnanimous girl, though with an ardent heart, as I have come to know well in her.
Of course, there is no particular love on either her side or his, but Dunya, besides being a clever girl, is at the same time a being as noble as an angel, and will consider it her duty to make the happiness of her husband, who in turn would begin to care for her happiness, and in the latter we have, for the time being, no great reason to doubt, though, I confess, the matter was settled rather quickly.
Besides, he is a very calculating man and, of course, will see for himself that his own marital happiness will be the more certain the happier Dunya is with him.
As for some unevenness of character, some old habits, and even a certain disagreement in thoughts (which cannot be avoided even in the happiest marriages), on that score Dunya herself told me that she trusts herself; that there is nothing to worry about and that she can endure much, on condition that the further relations are honest and just.
He, for instance, seemed to me at first as if somewhat sharp; but that may be precisely because he is a straightforward man, and it must be so.
For instance, on his second visit, having already received consent, in conversation he expressed himself that even before, not knowing Dunya, he had resolved to take a girl who was honest but without a dowry, and necessarily one who had already experienced a distressed situation; because, as he explained, a husband should owe nothing to his wife, and it is much better if the wife considers her husband her benefactor.
I add that he expressed himself somewhat more softly and kindly than I have written, because I have forgotten the actual expression and remember only the thought, and, besides, he said this by no means intentionally, but obviously having let it slip in the heat of conversation, so that he even tried afterwards to correct and soften it; but it still seemed to me a little as if harsh, and I told Dunya about it.
But Dunya answered me even with annoyance that "words are not yet deeds," and that is, of course, true.
Before deciding, Dunya did not sleep the whole night and, thinking that I was already asleep, got out of bed and walked back and forth about the room all night; at last she knelt down and prayed long and fervently before the icon, and in the morning she announced to me that she had decided.
"I have already mentioned that Pyotr Petrovich is now setting off for Petersburg.
He has big business there, and he wants to open a public law office in Petersburg.
He has long been engaged in handling various claims and lawsuits and only the other day just won a significant lawsuit.
And it is also necessary for him to go to Petersburg because he has an important case there in the Senate.
Thus, dear Rodya, he can be very useful to you too, even in everything, and Dunya and I have already decided that you, even from this very day, could definitely begin your future career and consider your lot already clearly determined.
Oh, if only this could come true!
It would be such an advantage that one must regard it as nothing other than a direct mercy of the Almighty toward us.
Dunya dreams of nothing but this.
We have already ventured to say a few words on this subject to Pyotr Petrovich.
He expressed himself cautiously and said that, of course, since he cannot do without a secretary, it is naturally better to pay a salary to a relative than to a stranger, if only the latter proves capable of the position (as if you would not prove capable!), but he immediately expressed doubt that your university studies would not leave you time for work in his office.
This time the matter ended there, but Dunya now thinks of nothing but this.
For several days now she has been simply in some kind of fever and has drawn up a whole project about how in the future you might be Pyotr Petrovich's colleague and even partner in his litigation business, especially since you are yourself in the law faculty.
I, Rodya, fully agree with her and share all her plans and hopes, seeing in them complete probability; and, despite Pyotr Petrovich's present, quite explicable evasiveness (because he does not yet know you), Dunya is firmly convinced that she will achieve everything by her good influence on her future husband, and of this she is sure.
Of course, we were careful not to let slip to Pyotr Petrovich anything at all of these further dreams of ours and, above all, that you would be his partner.
He is a positive man and might perhaps take it very coldly, since all this would seem to him mere daydreams.
Likewise, neither I nor Dunya have yet said half a word to him about our firm hope that he will help us assist you with money while you are at the university; we did not speak of it because, first, it will come about of itself afterwards, and he will surely, without unnecessary words, offer it himself (as if he would refuse Dunya in this), the sooner because you yourself may become his right hand in the office and receive this help not as a benefaction but as a salary earned by you.
That is how Dunya wants to arrange it, and I fully agree with her.
Secondly, we did not speak of it because I especially wanted to place you on an equal footing with him at our forthcoming meeting now.
When Dunya spoke to him about you with enthusiasm, he replied that one must first examine every man oneself and more closely in order to judge him, and that he imagines he will, on becoming acquainted with you, form his own opinion of you.
Do you know what, my priceless Rodya, it seems to me, on certain considerations (which, however, in no way relate to Pyotr Petrovich, but are simply some of my own, personal, even perhaps old-womanish, feminine whims), it seems to me that I might perhaps do better to live after their marriage separately, as I live now, and not together with them.
I am quite sure that he will be so noble and delicate that he will himself invite me and propose that I no longer be parted from my daughter, and if he has not spoken until now, it is, of course, because it is assumed so even without words; but I shall refuse.
I have noticed in life more than once that mothers-in-law are not very much to the husbands' liking, and I not only do not want to be even the slightest burden to anyone, but I myself want to be completely free, as long as I have at least some piece of my own and children like you and Dunya.
If possible, I shall settle near you both, because, Rodya, I have saved the most pleasant thing for the end of the letter: know then, my dear friend, that perhaps very soon we shall all come together again and all three of us shall embrace after almost three years of separation!
It is already definitely decided that Dunya and I are setting out for Petersburg; when exactly, I do not know, but in any case very, very soon, perhaps even in a week.
It all depends on Pyotr Petrovich's arrangements, who, as soon as he has looked around in Petersburg, will immediately let us know.
He wants, on certain calculations, to hasten the marriage ceremony as much as possible and even, if it is possible, to have the wedding in the present meat-eating season, and if that cannot be done, because of the shortness of the time, then immediately after the Dormition fast.
Oh, with what happiness I shall press you to my heart!
Dunya is all in agitation from the joy of meeting you, and once said, in jest, that for this alone she would have married Pyotr Petrovich.
She is an angel!
She now adds nothing of her own for you, but only told me to write that she has so much to say to you, so much, that now her hand does not even rise to take up the pen, because in a few lines you can write nothing and will only upset yourself; she told me to embrace you tightly and send you countless kisses.
But, despite the fact that we may perhaps very soon meet in person, I shall nevertheless send you money one of these days, as much as I can.
Now that everyone has learned that Dunya is marrying Pyotr Petrovich, my credit has suddenly increased, and I know for certain that Afanasy Ivanovich will now trust me, against the pension, even up to seventy-five rubles, so that I may send you twenty-five or even thirty rubles.
I would send more, but I am afraid for our travel expenses; and although Pyotr Petrovich was so kind as to take upon himself part of the costs of our journey to the capital, namely, he himself offered, at his own expense, to deliver our luggage and the big trunk (somehow through acquaintances there), we must nevertheless count on our arrival in Petersburg, where one cannot show oneself without a penny, at least for the first days.
We have, however, already calculated everything with Dunya to a nicety, and it turned out that the journey will take little.
It is only ninety versts from us to the railway, and we have already, just in case, arranged with a peasant carter we know; and there Dunya and I will ride most comfortably in third class.
So that perhaps I shall manage to send you not twenty-five but surely thirty rubles.
But enough; I have filled two sheets on both sides, and there is no more room left; it is our whole story; and how many events have accumulated!
And now, my priceless Rodya, I embrace you until our near meeting and bless you with my maternal blessing.
Love Dunya, your sister, Rodya; love her as she loves you, and know that she loves you boundlessly, more than herself.
She is an angel, and you, Rodya, you are our all — our whole hope and all our trust.
If only you were happy, and we shall be happy.
Do you still pray to God, Rodya, as before, and do you believe in the goodness of our Creator and Redeemer?
I fear in my heart that the newest fashionable unbelief has visited you?
If so, then I pray for you.
Remember, dear one, how even in your childhood, during your father's lifetime, you babbled your prayers on my knees and how happy we all were then!
Goodbye, or, better, until we meet!
I embrace you very, very tightly and kiss you countless times.
Yours unto death

Pulcheria Raskolnikova."
Almost the whole time Raskolnikov was reading, from the very beginning of the letter, his face was wet with tears; but when he finished, it was pale, distorted by a convulsion, and a heavy, bilious, wicked smile writhed on his lips.
He laid his head on his thin and battered pillow and thought, thought for a long time.
His heart beat violently, and his thoughts were greatly agitated.
At last he felt stifled and cramped in this yellow little room, which resembled a cupboard or a trunk.
His gaze and his thought asked for space.
He grabbed his hat and went out, this time no longer afraid of meeting anyone on the stairs; he had forgotten about that.
And he took the way toward Vasilyevsky Island across V- Prospect, as if hurrying there on business, but, as was his habit, he walked without noticing the road, whispering to himself and even speaking aloud to himself, which greatly astonished passers-by.
Many took him for a drunkard.
