He woke up late the next day, after an anxious dream, but the dream did not strengthen him.
He woke up bilious, irritable, angry, and looked at his cubicle with hatred.
It was a tiny cell, about six paces long, which had the most pitiful appearance with its yellow, dusty wallpaper that had fallen off the walls everywhere, and was so low that a slightly tall man felt creepy in it, and it always seemed like he was about to bang his head on the ceiling.
The furniture corresponded to the room: there were three old chairs, not quite serviceable, a painted table in the corner on which lay several notebooks and books; just by the way they were dusty, it was clear that no hand had touched them for a long time; and, finally, an awkward large sofa, which almost occupied the entire wall and half the width of the entire room, once upholstered in chintz, but now in rags and served as Raskolnikov's bed.
He often slept on it as he was, without undressing, without a sheet, covering himself with his old, dilapidated student's coat and with one small pillow at his head, under which he put all the clean and worn linen he had, so that the headboard would be higher.
There was a small table in front of the sofa.
It was difficult to get down and make up any more; but Raskolnikov was even pleased with this in his present state of mind.
He resolutely walked away from everyone, like a turtle into its shell, and even the face of the maid who was obliged to serve him and sometimes looked into his room aroused bile and convulsions in him.
This happens with other monomaniacs who focus too much on something.
His landlady had already stopped giving him food two weeks ago, and he still hadn't thought to go and explain himself to her, even though he had been sitting without lunch.
Nastasia, the cook and the hostess's only maid, was partly glad of the tenant's mood and completely stopped cleaning and revenge, so only once a week, accidentally, sometimes took up a broom.
She had woken him up now.
— Get up, why are you sleeping! "It's ten o'clock!" she shouted above him.
I brought you some tea; do you want some tea?
Are you skinny?
The tenant opened his eyes, shuddered, and recognized Nastasia.
"The tea's from the hostess, isn't it?" "What is it?" he asked, slowly and painfully sitting up on the sofa.
— How from the hostess!
She put her own cracked teapot in front of him, with the tea already drunk, and put two yellow lumps of sugar.
—Here, Nastasia, take this, please,— he said, fumbling in his pocket (he was still sleeping dressed) and pulled out a handful of copper.
At least get a little cheaper sausage from the sausage shop.
"I'll bring you a plate in a minute, but don't you want some cabbage soup instead?"
Good soup, yesterday's.
I left it for you yesterday, but you came late.
Good cabbage soup.
When the cabbage soup was brought and he began to eat it, Nastasia sat down next to him on the sofa and began to chat.
She was one of the village women and a very talkative woman.
"Praskovya Pavlovna wants to complain to the police about you,— she said.
He grimaced hard.
"To the police?"
What does she want?
— You don't pay money and you don't leave the vater.
It is known that it is necessary.
—Eh, I haven't had enough yet," he muttered, gritting his teeth, "no, it's... inappropriate for me now."…
She's a fool," he added loudly.
— I'm going to visit her today, I'll talk to her.
"She's a fool, just like me, but are you lying like a sack, smartass, and I can't see anything from you?"
Before, you said, you went to teach children, but now you don't do anything?
"I'm doing...— Raskolnikov said reluctantly and sternly.
"What are you doing?"
— A job…
— How do I get a job?
—I think so,— he replied seriously after a pause.
Nastasia roared with laughter.
She was one of the funny ones, and when they made her laugh, she laughed inaudibly, swaying and shaking her whole body until she felt sick herself.
"You've got a lot of money, haven't you?" "What is it?" she finally managed to say.
— You can't teach children without boots.
I don't give a damn.
"Don't spit in the well."
— They pay for children with copper.
What will you do for a penny?  He continued reluctantly, as if responding to his own thoughts.
— Would you like all the capital at once?
He looked at her strangely.
—Yes, the whole capital," he answered firmly after a pause.
—Well, you're taking it a little bit, or you'll scare me; you're terribly awake."
Is there no need to go after Saika?
— As you wish.
— Yes, I forgot!
After all, the letter came to you yesterday without you.
—The letter! Come to me! From whom?
— From whom, I don't know.
I gave my three kopecks to the postman.
Will you give it back?
"Then carry it, for God's sake, carry it!"  Raskolnikov shouted in agitation, —My God!
A minute later, the letter arrived.
That's right: from my mother, from the district province.
He even paled as he accepted it.
It had been a long time since he had received a letter; but now something else suddenly gripped his heart.
"Nastasia, go away, for God's sake; here are your three kopecks, but for God's sake, go away quickly!"
The letter trembled in his hands; he did not want to open it in front of her: he wanted to be alone with this letter.
When Nastasia came out, he quickly raised it to his lips and kissed it; then for a long time he stared at the handwriting of the address, at the small and crooked handwriting of his mother, familiar and dear to him, who had once taught him to read and write.
He hesitated; he even seemed to be afraid of something.
Finally, he opened it: the letter was large, thick, in two lots; two large postage sheets were finely written.
"My dear Rodya," his mother wrote, "it's been more than two months since I've had a written conversation with you, which I've suffered from myself and even stayed up one night thinking.
But you probably won't blame me for my involuntary silence.
You know how much I love you; you are the only one with us, with Dunya and me, you are our everything, all our hope, our hope.
What happened to me when I found out that you had already left the university for several months, for lack of something to support yourself, and that your lessons and other means had stopped!
How could I help you with my one hundred and twenty rubles a year pension?
The fifteen rubles that I sent you four months ago, I borrowed, as you yourself know, on account of the same pension, from our local merchant Afanasy Ivanovich Vakhrushin.
He's a kind man and was also a friend of your father's.
But by giving him the right to receive a pension for me, I had to wait until the debt was paid, and that has just now been fulfilled, so I couldn't send you anything during all this time.
But now, thank God, I think I can send you more, and anyway, we can even boast of our fortune now, which I hasten to inform you about.
And first of all, do you realize, dear Rodya, that your sister has been living with me for a month and a half now, and we will never be apart again.
Thank God, her tortures are over, but I'll tell you everything in order so that you know how it was and what we've been hiding from you so far.
When you wrote to me two months ago that you had heard from someone that Dunya suffered a lot from rudeness in the house of the Svidrigailovs, and asked me for precise explanations, what could I write to you in response?
If I had written you the whole truth, you would probably have given up everything and come to us, even on foot, because I know your character and feelings, and you would not let your sister be offended.
I was desperate myself, but what could I do?
I didn't know the whole truth myself at the time.
The main difficulty was that Dunechka, having entered their home as a governess last year, had taken a hundred rubles in advance on condition of a monthly deduction from her salary, and therefore it was impossible to leave the place without paying off the debt.
But she took this sum (I can explain everything to you now, dear Rodya) more in order to send you sixty rubles, which you needed so much at that time and which you received from us last year.
We deceived you then, we wrote that it was out of Dunya's accumulated old money, but that wasn't the case, and now I'm telling you the whole truth, because everything has suddenly changed, by God's will, for the better, and so that you know how much Dunya loves you and what a priceless heart she has.
Indeed, Mr. Svidrigailov treated her very rudely at first and made various discourtesies and ridicule at the table.…
But I don't want to go into all these difficult details, so as not to worry you unnecessarily when it's all over now.
In short, despite the kind and noble treatment of Marfa Petrovna, Mr. Svidrigailov's wife, and all the household, it was very difficult for Dunechka, especially when Mr. Svidrigailov, according to his old regimental habit, was under the influence of Bacchus.
But what happened afterwards?
Imagine that this madcap had a passion for Dunya for a long time, but he kept hiding it under the guise of rudeness and contempt for her.
Perhaps he was ashamed and horrified himself, seeing himself already in his old age and the father of a family, with such frivolous hopes, and therefore he was involuntarily angry at Dunya.
Or maybe it's also that by his rudeness and ridicule, he only wanted to hide the whole truth from others.
But at last he could not resist and dared to make an obvious and vile offer to Dunya, promising her various rewards and, moreover, to give up everything and go with her to another village or, perhaps, abroad.
Can you imagine all her suffering!
It was impossible to leave the place now, not only because of a financial debt, but also to spare Marfa Petrovna, who might suddenly become suspicious, and therefore would have to settle discord in the family.
And it would have been a big scandal for Dunechka, too; it wouldn't have been like that.
There were many different reasons for this, so Dunya could not expect to escape from this terrible house before six weeks.
Of course, you know Dunya, you know how smart she is and with what a strong character.
Dunechka can endure a lot and even in the most extreme cases find in herself so much generosity that she does not lose her firmness.
She didn't even write to me about everything, so as not to upset me, and we often sent messages.
The denouement was unexpected.
Marfa Petrovna accidentally overheard her husband pleading with Dunechka in the garden, and, having misunderstood everything, she accused her of everything, thinking that she was the cause of everything.
A terrible scene happened right there in their garden: Marfa Petrovna even hit Dunya, didn't want to listen to anything, but she screamed for an hour and finally ordered Dunya to be taken to my place in the city at once, on a simple peasant cart, into which all her things, underwear, dresses, everything were dumped, unrelated and unsettled.
And then a torrential rain began to fall, and Dunya, insulted and disgraced, had to travel with the peasant for seventeen miles in an uncovered cart.
Think now, what could I write to you in a letter in response to yours, which I received two months ago, and what should I write about?
I myself was in despair; I did not dare to write the truth to you, because you would have been very unhappy, upset and indignant, and what could you have done?
Perhaps I should also ruin myself, and Dunechka forbade me; but I could not fill the letter with trifles and about anything, while there was such sorrow in my soul.
For a whole month, we had gossip about this story all over the city, and it got to the point where we couldn't even go to church with Dunya because of the contemptuous looks and whispers, and there were even conversations out loud in front of us.
Everyone I knew pulled away from us, everyone stopped even bowing, and I probably found out that the merchants' clerks and some clerks wanted to give us a low insult by smearing the gates of our house with tar, so the owners began to demand that we move out of the apartment.
The reason for all this was Marfa Petrovna, who managed to blame and pollute Dunya in all the houses.
She is familiar with everyone and has been coming to the city every minute this month, and since she is a little chatty and likes to talk about her family affairs and, especially, complain about her husband to everyone, which is very wrong, she spread the whole story in a short time, not only in the city, but and by county.
I got sick, but Dunechka was tougher than me, and if you could see how she endured everything and comforted and encouraged me!
She's an angel!
But, by God's mercy, our torments were shortened: Mr. Svidrigailov came to his senses and repented, and, probably feeling sorry for Dunya, presented Marfa Petrovna with complete and obvious proofs of all Dunechka's innocence, namely, a letter that Dunya, even before Marfa Petrovna found them in the garden, was forced to write and hand over to him, in order to reject the personal explanations and secret meetings on which he insisted, and which, after Dunechka's departure, remained in the hands of Mr. Svidrigailov.
In this letter, she reproached him in the most fervent manner and with complete indignation precisely for the ignobility of his behavior towards Marfa Petrovna, made him look like a father and a family man, and that, finally, how vile it was of him to torment and make unhappy an already unhappy and defenseless girl.
In short, dear Rodya, this letter is so nobly and touchingly written that I wept reading it, and to this day I cannot read it without tears.
In addition, to justify Dunya, there finally appeared the testimony of the servants, who saw and knew much more than Mr. Svidrigailov himself had assumed, as is always the case.
Marfa Petrovna was completely amazed and "killed again," as she herself confessed to us, but she was fully convinced of Dunechkina's innocence, and the very next day, Sunday, she arrived directly at the cathedral, on her knees and with tears begged the lady to give her the strength to endure this new ordeal and fulfill her duty.
Then, straight from the cathedral, without visiting anyone, she came to us, told us everything, wept bitterly and, in complete repentance, hugged and begged Dunya to forgive her.
That very morning, without hesitating at all, she went straight from us to all the houses in the city and everywhere, in the most flattering terms for Dunechka, shedding tears, restored her innocence and the nobility of her feelings and behavior.
Moreover, she showed and read aloud Dunechkino's handwritten letter to Mr. Svidrigailov and even gave copies of it (which, it seems to me, is already superfluous).
Thus, she had to travel around the city for several days in a row, as some began to take offense that others were preferred, and thus queues began to form, so that every house was already waiting in advance and everyone knew that on such and such a day Marfa Petrovna would be there to read this letter, and on Each reading, again, was attended by even those who had already listened to the letter several times, both at their homes and at other acquaintances, in turn.
My opinion is that a lot, a lot, was superfluous here; but Marfa Petrovna is already of that character.
At least she has completely restored Dunechka's honor, and the whole heinousness of this case has laid an indelible shame on her husband, as the main culprit, so that I even feel sorry for him; they have already dealt too harshly with this madcap.
Dunya was immediately invited to give lessons in some houses, but she refused.
In general, everyone suddenly began to treat her with special respect.
All this contributed mainly to that unexpected event, through which, one might say, our whole fate is now changing.
Find out, dear Rodya, that the groom has wooed Dunya and that she has already given her consent, which I hasten to inform you as soon as possible.
And although this matter was done without your advice, you probably won't complain about me or your sister, because you'll see for yourself from the case that it would be impossible for us to wait and delay until we receive your answer.
And you yourself couldn't discuss everything exactly in absentia.
It just happened that way.
He is already a court counselor, Pyotr Petrovich Luzhin, and a distant relative of Marfa Petrovna, who contributed a lot to this.
He began by expressing a desire to get to know us through her, was well received, drank coffee, and the very next day sent a letter in which he very politely explained his offer and asked for a quick and decisive response.
He's a busy and businesslike man, and he's in a hurry to get to Petersburg now, so he values every minute.
Of course, we were very surprised at first, because it all happened too soon and unexpectedly.
We thought and pondered together all that day.
He is a reliable and well-off man, he serves in two places and already has his own capital.
True, he is already forty-five years old, but he is quite pleasant-looking and can still be liked by women, and in general he is a very respectable and decent man, only a little sullen and kind of arrogant.
But maybe that's just how it seems at first glance.
And I warn you, dear Rodya, when you see him in Petersburg, which will happen very soon, then do not judge too quickly and fervently, as is typical of you, if at first glance something does not seem to you in him.
I'm saying this just in case, although I'm sure he'll make a pleasant impression on you.
And besides, in order to identify any person, you need to treat them gradually and carefully, so as not to fall into error and prejudice, which are very difficult to correct and make up for later.
And Pyotr Petrovich, at least by many accounts, is a very respectable man.
On his first visit, he told us that he was a positive person, but in many ways shared, as he put it, "the beliefs of our newest generations" and the enemy of all prejudice.
He said a lot more, because he is somewhat vain and very much likes to be listened to, but this is almost not a vice.
Of course, I didn't understand much, but Dunya explained to me that he was a man of little education, but he was smart and seemed kind.
You know your sister's character, Rodya.
She is a firm, prudent, patient and generous girl, although with an ardent heart, which I have studied well in her.
Of course, there is no special love on either her or his part, but Dunya, besides being an intelligent girl, is at the same time a noble being, like an angel, and she will make it her duty to make her husband happy, who in turn would take care of her happiness, and in the latter we do not We have, for now, great reasons to doubt, although, admittedly, things got done quickly.
Besides, he is a very prudent man and, of course, he will see for himself that his own marital happiness will be the more certain the happier Dunechka will be with him.
And as for any irregularities in character, any old habits, and even some disagreement in thoughts (which cannot be avoided even in the happiest marriages), Dunechka herself told me that she hoped for herself; that there was nothing to worry about, and that she could bear a lot, on condition if the future relationship is honest and fair.
For example, he seemed harsh to me at first, but this may be precisely because he is a straightforward person, and it certainly is.
For example, on the second visit, having already received consent, he expressed in conversation that even before, without knowing Dunya, he had decided to take an honest girl, but without a dowry, and certainly one who had already experienced distress; because, as he explained, a husband should not owe anything to his wife, but it is much better if the wife considers her husband to be her benefactor.
I add that he expressed himself somewhat milder and more affectionately than I wrote, because I have forgotten the real expression, but I remember only one thought, and besides, he did not say it intentionally, but obviously let it slip in the heat of conversation, so that he even tried to correct and soften it later; but I Still, it seemed a little harsh, and I informed Doona about it.
But Dunya even replied with annoyance that "words are not deeds yet," and this, of course, is true.
Before deciding, Dunechka did not sleep all night and, believing that I was already asleep, got out of bed and walked up and down the room all night; finally she knelt down and prayed long and fervently before the icon, and the next morning announced to me that she had made up her mind.
"I have already mentioned that Pyotr Petrovich is now going to St. Petersburg.
He has big business there, and he wants to open a public law office in St. Petersburg.
He has been involved in various lawsuits and lawsuits for a long time and has just won a significant lawsuit the other day.
That's why he needs to go to Petersburg, because he has a significant case in the Senate there.
So, dear Rodya, he can be very useful to you, even in everything, and Dunya and I have already decided that even from now on you could definitely begin your future career and consider your fate already clearly defined.
Oh, if only it could come true!
This would be such an advantage that we must consider it nothing less than a direct mercy from the Almighty.
Dunya only dreams about it.
We have already ventured to say a few words on this subject to Peter Petrovich.
He expressed himself carefully and said that, of course, since he couldn't do without a secretary, it was certainly better to pay a relative's salary than someone else's, if only he turned out to be capable of the position (of course you weren't capable!), but immediately expressed doubt that your university studies would not They'll leave you time to study in his office.
That's the end of it this time, but Dunya doesn't even think about anything else now.
Now, for several days now, she's just been in a kind of heat and has drawn up a whole project that later you can be a comrade and even a companion of Pyotr Petrovich in his litigation studies, especially since you yourself are at the Faculty of law.
Rodya, I completely agree with her and share all her plans and hopes, seeing in them the full likelihood; and despite Pyotr Petrovich's present, very understandable evasiveness (because he doesn't know you yet), Dunya is firmly convinced that she will achieve everything by her kind influence on her future husband, and in She's sure of it.
Of course, we were careful not to let Peter Petrovich know about any of these future dreams of ours and, most importantly, that you would be his companion.
He is a positive person and, perhaps, would have accepted it very dryly, since all this would have seemed to him only dreams.
In the same way, neither Dunya nor I have yet spoken half a word to him about our strong hope that he will help us contribute money to you while you are at the university; therefore, we did not say that, firstly, this will happen by itself later, and he will probably, without unnecessary words, offer himself (of course he would have refused Dunechka that) all the sooner because you can become his right-hand man in the office yourself and receive this help not in the form of a boon, but in the form of a well-deserved salary.
That's how Dunechka wants to arrange it, and I completely agree with her.
Secondly, that's why they didn't tell me, because I especially wanted to put you on an equal footing with him when we meet today.
When Dunya spoke to him about you with delight, he replied that you should first examine every person yourself and take a closer look at him in order to judge him, and that he imagined himself getting to know you and forming his own opinion about you.
You know what, my precious Rodya, it seems to me, for certain reasons (however, they are by no means related to Pyotr Petrovich, but just for some of my own, personal, even, perhaps, old—fashioned, womanly whims), it seems to me that I might do better if I live after their marriage, I especially live as I do now, and not with them.
I am quite sure that he will be so noble and considerate that he will invite me himself and suggest that I not be separated from my daughter any more, and if he has not yet spoken, it is, of course, because it is assumed without words; but I will refuse.
I've noticed more than once in my life that mothers-in-law don't really like husbands, and not only do I not want to be even the slightest burden to anyone, but I also want to be completely free myself, as long as I have at least some piece of my own and children like you and Dunechka.
If possible, I will settle down next to you both, because, Rodya, I have saved the most pleasant thing for the end of the letter: find out, my dear friend, that maybe very soon we will all come together again and embrace all three of us after almost three years of separation!
It has probably already been decided that Dunya and I will leave for Petersburg, I don't know exactly when, but in any case, very, very soon, maybe even in a week.
Everything depends on the orders of Pyotr Petrovich, who, as soon as he looks around in Petersburg, will immediately let us know.
He wants, according to some calculations, to hurry up the marriage ceremony as soon as possible and even, if possible, to have a wedding in the current meat-eater, and if it does not succeed, due to the shortness of time, then immediately after the warm-up.
Oh, with what happiness I will hold you to my heart!
Dunya is all agitated with the joy of seeing you, and once said, jokingly, that she would have married Pyotr Petrovich out of that alone.
She's an angel!
She doesn't attribute anything to you now, but only told me to write that she has so much to talk to you about, so much that now she can't even raise her hand to take up a pen, because you can't write anything in a few lines, but you'll only upset yourself; she told me to hug you tighter and send you countless kisses.
But despite the fact that we may get together in person very soon, I'll still send you as much money as I can in a few days.
Now that everyone has found out that Dunechka is marrying Pyotr Petrovich, and my credit has suddenly increased, I probably know that Afanasy Ivanovich will believe me now, on account of the pension, even to seventy-five rubles, so maybe I'll send you twenty-five or even thirty rubles.
I would have sent more, but I'm afraid for our travel expenses; and although Pyotr Petrovich was kind enough to bear part of the cost of our passage to the capital, namely, he volunteered, at his own expense, to deliver our luggage and a large trunk (somehow through his friends there), but Still, we must count on coming to St. Petersburg, where we cannot show up penniless, even for the first few days.
However, we have already calculated everything with Dunechka to the point of accuracy, and it turned out that the road will take a little.
It's only ninety versts from us to the railway, and, just in case, we've already made arrangements with a peasant cabman we know; and there Dunechka and I will happily take a ride in third class.
So maybe I'll send you thirty rubles instead of twenty-five.
But that's enough; I've written two pages all around, and there's no more room left; our whole story; well, and how many incidents have accumulated!
And now, my precious Rodya, I embrace you until our close meeting and bless you with my maternal blessing.
Love Dunya, your sister, Rodya; love her the way she loves you, and know that she loves you infinitely, more than herself.
She's an angel, and you, Rodya, you're everything to us —all our hope and all our hope.
If only you were happy, we would be happy.
Do you still pray to God, Rodya, and do you believe in the goodness of our creator and redeemer?
I'm afraid in my heart that the latest fashionable disbelief has visited you.
If so, I'm praying for you.
Remember, dear, how in your childhood, during your father's lifetime, you babbled your prayers on my lap and how happy we were all then!
Goodbye, or better yet, goodbye!
I'm hugging you tight and kissing you countless times.
Yours to the grave

Pulcheria Raskolnikova".
Almost all the time Raskolnikov was reading, from the very beginning of the letter, his face was wet with tears; but when he finished, it was pale, twisted with a spasm, and a heavy, bilious, evil smile snaked across his lips.
He lay down with his head on his thin and worn pillow and thought for a long time.
His heart was beating violently, and his thoughts were agitated.
Finally, he felt stuffy and cramped in this yellow room, which looked like a closet or a chest.
His gaze and thought begged for space.
He grabbed his hat and went out, this time without fear of meeting anyone on the stairs; he had forgotten about it.
He took the path towards Vasilyevsky Island through V Avenue, as if in a hurry to get there for business, but, as usual, he walked without noticing the road, whispering to himself and even talking aloud to himself, which greatly surprised passers-by.
Many mistook him for a drunk.
