TECHNICAL SCIENCES

UDC 004.021

Akzholov R.K.

3rd year student of the Faculty of Mathematics and Information Technologies of ASU, Department of Information Technologies.
Astrakhan State University (Russia, Astrakhan)

MACHINE LEARNING

Abstract: the article analyzes machine learning methods.
Several methods are considered, examples of supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms are given, and areas of application are described.
Keywords: machine learning, neural networks, clustering, regression, classification, algorithm, data.
Machine learning is a category of algorithms that allows software applications to be more accurate in predicting outcomes without being explicitly programmed.
The main premise of machine learning is to create algorithms that can receive input data and use statistical analysis to predict output data as new data becomes available.
The processes involved in machine learning are similar to the processes of data mining and predictive modeling.
Both require searching data to find patterns and adjusting the program's actions accordingly.
Many people are familiar with machine learning from online stores and the advertising they receive from them.
This happens because recommendation systems use machine learning to personalize the delivery of online advertising in almost real time.
In addition to personalized marketing, other common use cases of machine learning include fraud detection, spam filtering, network security threat detection, preventive maintenance, and news feed creation.
How does machine learning work?
Machine learning algorithms are classified into supervised and unsupervised learning.
Supervised learning requires a data scientist with machine learning skills to provide both input and desired output, in addition to providing feedback on the accuracy of predictions during algorithm training.
Data researchers determine which variables or characteristics the model should analyze and use to develop predictions.
Once training is complete, the algorithm will apply the obtained data to new data.
Examples of supervised learning methods are classification and regression.
Classification is the most popular machine learning task.
The goal of this method is to classify objects according to a previously known attribute, for example, documents by languages, music by genres, etc.
A classic example of classification is the "Naive Bayes" algorithm.
Previously it was used in spam filters; now decision trees deal with this.
Another example of classification is the support vector machine method; it is the most popular classification method.
Previously it was used to classify everything: plant species, human faces in photographs, documents by topics.
Regression is used in tasks where it is necessary to predict a result.
Regression is given in the form of an equation that describes a function showing the relationship between input and output data.
This machine learning method is used in: forecasting the value of securities, medical diagnoses, etc.
Popular regression algorithms are linear, polynomial, logistic, etc.
Unsupervised learning methods do not require ready-made answers and are used to find dependencies between objects.
Such methods include: clustering, dimensionality reduction, and neural networks.
Clustering is a machine learning method in which objects are divided according to an unknown attribute, while the algorithm itself identifies these attributes.
Today this method has found its application in such tasks as image compression, combining close points on a map, etc.
The most popular algorithms are the K-means method and DBSCAN.
The dimensionality reduction method is used to collect features into higher-level abstractions.
For example, in some research it is often necessary to visualize data for convenient study and analysis.
Thus, algebraic functions can be represented in the form of function graphs, statistical samples - in the form of scatter diagrams.
Difficulties arise when it is necessary to visualize multidimensional data, when each object has many features.
Graphically, such objects are represented as a point in multidimensional space.
It is convenient for a person to analyze data displayed on a plane, so dimensionality reduction algorithms are used.
Examples of such algorithms are: the principal component method, singular value decomposition, and the T-SNE algorithm.
Today these algorithms are used in recommendation systems, topic modeling, etc.
Neural networks are used for more complex processing tasks than supervised learning systems, including image recognition, speech-to-text conversion, and natural language generation.
These neural networks work by combining millions of examples of training data and automatically identifying subtle correlations between many variables.
After training, the algorithm can use its bank of associations to interpret new data.
These algorithms became possible only in the era of big data, since they require huge amounts of training data.