TECHNICAL SCIENCES

UDC 004.021

Akzholov R.K.

3rd year student of the ASU Faculty of Mathematics and Information Technology, Department of Information Technology.
Astrakhan State University (Astrakhan, Russia)

MACHINE LEARNING

Abstract: the article analyzes machine learning methods.
Several methods are considered, examples of learning algorithms with and without a teacher are given, and the fields of application are described.
Keywords: machine learning, neural networks, clustering, regression, classification, algorithm, data.
Machine learning is a category of algorithms that allows software applications to be more accurate in predicting results without explicit programming.
The basic premise of machine learning is to create algorithms that can take inputs and use statistical analysis to predict outputs as new data becomes available.
The processes involved in machine learning are similar to those of data mining and predictive modeling.
Both require data retrieval to find patterns and adjust the program's actions accordingly.
Many people are familiar with machine learning from online stores and the advertising they generate.
This is because recommendation systems use machine learning to personalize the delivery of online ads in near real time.
In addition to personalized marketing, other common uses of machine learning include fraud detection, spam filtering, network security threat detection, preventive maintenance, and news feed creation.
How does machine learning work?
Machine learning algorithms are classified into learning with and without a teacher.
Teaching with a teacher requires a data scientist with machine learning skills to provide both input and desired output, in addition to providing feedback on the accuracy of predictions during algorithm training.
Data scientists determine which variables or characteristics the model should analyze and use to develop forecasts.
After completing the training, the algorithm will apply the acquired data to the new data.
Examples of teaching methods with a teacher are classification and regression.
Classification is the most popular machine learning task.
The purpose of this method is to classify objects according to a previously known feature, for example, documents by language, music by genre, etc.
The "Naive Bayes" algorithm is a classic example of classification.
It used to be used in spam filters, but now it's being handled by decision trees.
Another example of classification is the support vector method, which is the most popular classification method.
Previously, they classified everything: plant species, human faces in photographs, documents by topic.
Regression is used in tasks when it is necessary to predict the outcome.
Regression is defined as an equation that describes a function that shows the relationship between input and output data.
This machine learning method is used in: predicting the value of securities, medical diagnoses, etc.
Popular regression algorithms are linear, polynomial, logistic, etc.
Unsupervised learning methods do not require ready-made answers and are used to find dependencies between objects.
These methods include clustering, dimensionality reduction, and neural networks.
Clustering is a machine learning method in which objects are separated by an unknown feature, while the algorithm itself identifies these features.
Today, this method has found its application in such tasks as image compression, combining close points on a map, etc.
The most popular algorithms are the K-means method and DBSCAN.
The dimensionality reduction method is used to collect features in a higher-level abstraction.
For example, in some studies, it is often necessary to visualize data for convenient study and analysis.
Thus, algebraic functions can be represented as graphs of functions, statistical samples can be represented as scatter plots.
Difficulties arise when it is necessary to visualize multidimensional data, when each object has many features.
Graphically, such objects are represented as a point in a multidimensional space.
It is convenient for a person to analyze the data displayed on the plane, therefore, dimensionality reduction algorithms are used.
Examples of such algorithms are: principal component method, singular value decomposition, T-SNE algorithm.
Today, these algorithms are used in recommendation systems, thematic modeling, etc.
Neural networks are used for more complex processing tasks than supervised learning systems, including image recognition, speech-to-text conversion, and natural language creation.
These neural networks work by combining millions of training data examples and automatically identifying subtle correlations between many variables.
After training, the algorithm can use its bank of associations to interpret the new data.
These algorithms have only become possible in the era of big data, as they require huge amounts of training data.